---
categories: ["cell-type vs cell-state", "single-cell", "gene regulatory networks"]
date: July 19, 2022
---

# Transition states and cell fate decisions in epigenetic landscapes {.unnumbered}

> Moris N, Pina C, Arias AM. Transition states and cell fate decisions in
> epigenetic landscapes. Nat Rev Genet. 2016 Nov;17(11):693-703. doi:
> 10.1038/nrg.2016.98. Epub 2016 Sep 12. PMID:
> [27616569](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27616569/).

[Nature Reviews Genetics](https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg.2016.98)

September 12, 2016

Waddington's landscape shows how a progenitor cell may choose one of four paths
as the path a ball rolling down a hill takes is influenced by the terrain. The
biological terrain is made of genetic regulatory networks that shape the cell's
trajectory. This analogy, while intuitive, is hard to implement as a model since
cellular potential cannot be calculated. Further, rather than passively sliding
into the nearest channel, cells may need to jump into the next state.

Cells can change their state through stochastic fluctuations that are an
intrinsic part of biological systems. These fluctuations disturb the landscape
and drive cells towards one state or another. Cells can also change their state
based on changes to the landscape itself that affect the number of available
states or the ease with which some states are reached. Knowing the underlying
regulatory network allows us to predict behaviour.

[![](https://media.springernature.com/lw685/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%2Fnrg.2016.98/MediaObjects/41576_2016_Article_BFnrg201698_Fig3_HTML.jpg?as=webp)]{.aside}
Single-cell RNA sequencing captures transcriptional information with cellular
resolution and these studies have shown that, in general, differential
expression profiles make up cell types. However, even within cell types of a
certain expression profile, there remains transcriptional heterogeneity. Some of
this is technical noise, but it could also represent a transition state where
the cell is making a decision about its next state. The transition state
contains the same cell type expressing different genes in varying levels. These
cells can cluster into macrostates of the same cell type with different
microstates. Each of these microstates have different probabilities of
transitioning to the next state. Once a decision is made the cells express the
genes associated with the final state. This transition state is dynamic and can
be influenced by both cell intrinsic factors as well as external factors like
cell-cell signalling and the transition may be discontinuous.

This discontinuity in some of these transition states represent the step before
a state jump rather than cells along a transition continuum. While cellular
trajectories do exist, some of them may be discontinuous and the heterogeneity
seen in the macrostates represents the array of cells before they commit to a
state. Such systems evolve as a function of parameters like extracellular
signalling rather than as a function of time. Depending on the parameters, the
stability of the transition state can change and push cells into another state.
ES cells are an example of cells where the parameters stabilise the transition
state to keep them in an pluripotent state. 
