---
categories: ["cell-type vs cell-state", "single-cell", "transcriptomics", "systems biology"]
date: May 25, 2022
---

# What is a cell type and how to define it {.unnumbered}

[Cell](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.031)

July 21, 2022

Setting up standardized definitions and classification methods for cell types
is necessary for reproducible research. This review looks at cell types and
states in the brain context. Current methods involve single-cell
transcriptomics, spatial transcriptomics, and single-cell epigenomics
(ATAC-seq), connectomics where connections between neurons are studied.

Single-cell transcriptomics provide comprehensiveness and high dimensionality to
create cell atlases. Single-cell epigenomics with single-nucleus ATAC-seq or
methylation sequencing show gene and chromatin regulatory landscapes. Spatial
transcriptomics provides information on the distribution of cell and their
spatial relationships. The improvement of single-cell proteomics will enhance
our understanding of the links between gene expression, cell structure and
function, and the relationships between the transcriptome and proteome. 

### Cell types as a product of evolution

One approach to classify cells is phylogenetic classification which can provide
a classification framework based on relatedness in a similar way to the species
tree-of-life classification system. This shows the evolutionary distance between
cell types and the evolution of new cell type regulatory signatures. These
signatures encoded in the genome can be identified in transcriptomic data as
shown by the way single-cell transcriptomic clustering reveals cell types
consistent with existing knowledge. This data can also be used across species to
compare cell types and their evolutionary trajectories and relationships.

### Hierarchical organization of transcriptomically defined cell types

Transcriptomic studies of the brain show a hierarchical cell type organization.
Similar cell types also show differences between different brain regions. The
hierarchy reflects the evolutionary cell origins and relationships. Comparisons
between mouse and human cell type trees show that they are conserved across
species.

This data also shows that there are continuous and discrete variations between
cell types. The discrete differences tend to be at the top of the hierarchies
and the continuous one on the lower branches. While cells on different
transcriptomic profiles between ends of the tree, the variation between them is
a continuum which can make it difficult to divide the cells into types and get
exact type counts.

### Correspondence between transcriptomic cell types and other cellular properties

Cell type definitions become useful when they are associated with cell function.
The cell type taxonomy needs to be linked to anatomical and functional data,
to evaluate the transcriptomic classification. Data on other cellular properties
can be used to clean the transcriptomic data and pull out the molecular features
involved in classification.

### Cell types versus cell states

One of the main questions in classifying cell types is at what point is one cell
type really just another state of another cell type? This question is
particularly relevant at the lower branches of the cell type hierarchies where
the differences between types become increasingly continuous. It can be
difficult to delineate between types and states during development and between
individual and environmental variations.

In the brain, non-neuronal cell types have a number of different cell states
under different environmental and disease conditions. These cell types can
change their function and activity and transcriptome.

While single-cell transcriptomic data is usually a snapshot of a cell in time,
comparing transcriptomic data measured over time could reveal how clusters and
cell types move in their transcriptomic space. Generally we could assume that
transcriptomic changes are more abrupt and varied in the transitions between
types than between states. 

### Cell type development

Cell type development can involve complex trajectories and multiple
differentiation steps. There are transcriptional and epigenetic regulatory
programs that drive the proliferation and differentiation processes. The
regulatory elements may be captured through a combination of epigenomic and
spatial transcriptomic profiling with temporal resolution and lineage tracing.

### How to define cell type

Cell types are evolutionary products and basic functional units in multicellular
organisms. Their definition can start with the use of single-cell
transcriptomics-based taxonomy to capture the genetic signatures driving
cell-type differentiation. This information can be related to epigenetic
regulatory systems and validated with anatomical and functional studies and used
to determine how granular definitions should be. The definition process will
also need a systematic study of the developmental process to find causal
relationships and their molecular features. All this information and analysis
will also need a framework like a 'periodic table of cell types' to hold them
and standardized criteria, nomenclature, tools to enable sharing and
reproducible research.

